Replace/Refresh Terminology (#4865)
EnterpriseDB/docs: product_docs/docs/pgd/5/terminology.mdx

title: Terminology
---

There are many terms you will come across in EDB Postgres Distributed that you may be unfamiliar with. This page is a list of many of those terms with quick definitions. 

#### Asynchronous replication

> A type of replication that copies data to other PGD cluster members after the transaction completes on the origin node. Asynchronous replication can provide higher performance and lower latency than [synchronous replication](#synchrous-replication). However, asynchronous replication can see a lag in how long changes take to appear in the various cluster members. While the cluster will be [eventually consistent](#eventual-consistency), there will be potential for nodes to be apparently out of sync with each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A type of replication that copies data to other PGD cluster members after the transaction completes on the origin node. Asynchronous replication can provide higher performance and lower latency than [synchronous replication](#synchronous-replication). However, asynchronous replication can see a lag in how long changes take to appear in the various cluster members. While the cluster will be [eventually consistent](#eventual-consistency), there will be potential for nodes to be apparently out of sync with each other.
```

#### Commit scopes

Rules for managing how transactions are committed between the nodes and groups of a PGD cluster. Used to configure [synchronous replication](#synchronous-replication), [Group Commit](#group-commit), [CAMO](#camo-or-commit-at-most-once), [Eager](#eager), lag control and other PGD features.

#### CAMO or commit-at-most-once

> High value transactions in some applications require that the application successfully commited exactly once, and in the event of failover and retrying, only one. To ensure this happens in PGD, CAMO can be enabled allowing the application to actively participate in the transaction. 

Reviewer 2: s/only one/only once/?

Author: ```suggestion
High value transactions in some applications require that the application successfully commited exactly once, and in the event of failover and retrying, only once. To ensure this happens in PGD, CAMO can be enabled allowing the application to actively participate in the transaction. 
```

#### Conflicts

As data is replicated across the nodes of a PGD cluster, there may be occasions when changes from one source clash with changes from another source. This is a conflict and can be handled with conflict resolution (rules which decide which source is correct or preferred), or avoided with conflict-free data types.

#### Consensus

> How [Raft](#raft) makes group-wide decisions. Given a number of nodes in a group, Raft looks for a consensus of the number of nodes/2+1 voting for a decision. For example, when a write leader is being selected, a Raft consensus is sought over which node in the group will be the write leader. Consensus can only be reached if there is a quorum of voting members.

Reviewer 2: "number of nodes/2+1": this requires an understanding of the `/` operator for integer numbers. I think "majority" is easier to understand. You can still give the exact formula in parenthesis.

Author: ```suggestion
How [Raft](#raft) makes group-wide decisions. Given a number of nodes in a group, Raft looks for a consensus of the majority (number of nodes divided by 2 plus 1) voting for a decision. For example, when a write leader is being selected, a Raft consensus is sought over which node in the group will be the write leader. Consensus can only be reached if there is a quorum of voting members.
```

#### Cluster

> Generically, a cluster is a group of multiple redundant systems arranged to appear to end users as one system. See also [PGD clusters](#pgd-clusters) and [Postgres clusters](#postgres-cluster).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generically, a cluster is a group of multiple redundant systems arranged to appear to end users as one system. See also [PGD cluster](#pgd-cluster) and [Postgres cluster](#postgres-cluster).
```

#### DDL

Data Definition Language - The subset of SQL commands that deal with the defining and managing the structure of a database. DDL statements can create, modify and delete objects - schemas, tables and indexes - within the database. Common DDL commands are CREATE, ALTER and DROP.

#### DML

Data Manipulation Language - The subset of SQL commands that deal with manipulating the data held within a database. DML statements can create, modify and delete rows within tables in the database. Common DML commands are INSERT, UPDATE and DELETE. 

#### Eager

> Eager is a synchronous commit mode which avoids conflicts by detecting incoming potentially conflicting transactions and “eagerly” one of aborting them to maintain consistency. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eager is a synchronous commit mode that avoids conflicts by detecting incoming potentially conflicting transactions and “eagerly” aborts one of them to maintain consistency. 
```

#### Eventual consistency

A distributed computing consistency model stating changes to the same item in different cluster members will eventually converge to the same value. Asynchronous logical replication with conflict resolution and conflict-free replicated data types exhibit eventual consistency in PGD.

#### Failover

The automated process that recognizes a failure in a highly available database cluster and takes action to maintain consistency and availability. The goal is to minimize downtime and data loss.

#### Group commit

A synchronous commit mode which requires more than one PGD node to successfully receive and confirm a transaction at commit time.

#### Immediate consistency

A distributed computing model where all replicas are updated synchronously and simultaneously. This ensures that all reads after a write has completed will see the same value on all nodes. The downside of this approach is its negative impact on performance.

#### Logical replication

> A more efficient method of replicating changes in the database. While physical streaming replication duplicate the originating database’s disk blocks, logical replication instead sees the DML commands - inserts, deletes and updates,- published to all systems that have subscribed to see the changes. Each subscriber then applies the changes locally. Logical replication is not able to support most DDL

Reviewer 2: "sees the DML commands" may lead to the misinterpretation of using SQL- and trigger based replication, which have their own set of gotchas. And for which other OSS solutions for Postgres exist and are known problematic.

I'd like to ensure we avoid this confusion. How about: "logical replication instead transmits the changes independent of the underlying physical storage format"?

Author: ```suggestion
A more efficient method of replicating changes in the database. While physical streaming replication duplicate the originating database’s disk blocks, logical replication instead takes the changes made, independent of the underlying physical storage format, and publishes them to all systems that have subscribed to see the changes. Each subscriber then applies the changes locally. Logical replication is not able to support most DDL
```

#### Node

A general term for an element of a distributed system. A node can play host to any service. In PGD, there are [PGD Nodes](#pgd-node) which run a Postgres database and the BDR extension and optionally a PGD Proxy service.

> Typically, for high availability, each node runs on separate physical hardware, but not necessarily. For example, in modern cloud platforms the hardware may be shared with the cloud.

Reviewer 2: Would a proxy being colocated w/ the PGD node be a better example? The cloud is obviously cloudy, anyway.

Author: ```suggestion
Typically, for high availability, each node runs on separate physical hardware, but not necessarily. For example, a proxy might share a hardware node with a database.
```

#### Node groups

PGD Nodes in PGD clusters can be organized into groups to reflect the logical operation of the cluster. For example, the data nodes in a particular physical location may be part of a dedicated node group for the location.

#### PGD cluster

A group of multiple redundant database systems and proxies arranged to avoid single points of failure while appearing to end users as one system. PGD clusters may be run on Docker instances, cloud instances or “bare” Linux hosts, or a combination of those platforms. A PGD cluster may also include backup and proxy nodes. The data nodes in a cluster are grouped together in a top level group and into various local [node groups](#node-groups). 

### PGD node

In a PGD cluster, there are nodes which run databases and participate in the PGD Cluster. A typical PGD node will run a Postgres database and the BDR extension and optionally a PGD Proxy service. PGD Nodes may also be referred to as data nodes which suggests they store data, though some PGD Nodes, specifically [witness nodes](#witness-nodes) do not do that.

#### Physical replication

> By making an exact copy of database disk blocks as they are modified to one or more standby cluster members, physical replication provides an easily implemented method to replicate servers. But there are restrictions on how it can be used. For example, only one master node can run write transactions. Also, the method requires that all cluster members are on the same major version of the database software, in addition to several other more complex restrictions.

Reviewer 2: Are these much more complex? Isn't is just mainly: same OS and CPU architecture?

Author: ```suggestion
By making an exact copy of database disk blocks as they are modified to one or more standby cluster members, physical replication provides an easily implemented method to replicate servers. But there are restrictions on how it can be used. For example, only one master node can run write transactions. Also, the method requires that all cluster members are on the same major version of the database software with the same operating system and CPU architecture.
```

#### Postgres cluster

> Traditionally, in Postgresql, a number of databases running on a single server is referred to as a cluster (of databases). This kind of Postgres cluster is not highly available. To get high availability and redundancy, you need a [PGD Cluster](#pgd-cluster).

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we spell PostgreSQL with an uppercase SQL at the end?

Author: ```suggestion
Traditionally, in PostgreSQL, a number of databases running on a single server is referred to as a cluster (of databases). This kind of Postgres cluster is not highly available. To get high availability and redundancy, you need a [PGD Cluster](#pgd-cluster).
```

title: Terminology
---

There are many terms you will come across in EDB Postgres Distributed that you may be unfamiliar with. This page is a list of many of those terms with quick definitions. 

#### Asynchronous replication

> Copies data to cluster members after the transaction completes on the origin node. Asynchronous replication can provide higher performance and lower latency than synchronous replication. However, asynchronous replication can see a lag in how long changes take to appear in the various cluster members. While the cluster will be [eventually consistent](#eventual-consistency), there will be potential for nodes to be apparently out of sync with each other.

Reviewer 3: Thinking rearranging the sentences might make this easier on the brand new reader i.e. 

Asynchronous replication can provide higher performance and lower latency than synchronous replication. With asynchronous replication, the data is copied to cluster members after the transaction completes on the original node. However, asynchronous replication can see a lag in how long changes take to appear in the various cluster members. While the cluster will be [eventually consistent](#eventual-consistency), there will be potential for nodes to be apparently out of sync with each other.

Author: That starts by not explaining what it is and then making statements about features and comparing it with something the reader has yet to meet.

```suggestion
A type of replication that copies data to other PGD cluster members after the transaction completes on the origin node. Asynchronous replication can provide higher performance and lower latency than [synchronous replication](#synchrous-replication). However, asynchronous replication can see a lag in how long changes take to appear in the various cluster members. While the cluster will be [eventually consistent](#eventual-consistency), there will be potential for nodes to be apparently out of sync with each other.
```

#### Commit scopes

Rules for managing how transactions are committed between the nodes and groups of a PGD cluster. Used to configure [synchronous replication](#synchronous-replication), [Group Commit](#group-commit), [CAMO](#camo-or-commit-at-most-once), [Eager](#eager), lag control and other PGD features.

#### CAMO or commit-at-most-once

> High value transactions in some applications require that the application is able to not only confirm that the transaction has been committed but that the transaction is only committed once or not at all. To ensure this happens in PGD, CAMO can be enabled allowing the application to actively participate in the transaction. 

Reviewer 3: something about this first sentence keeps tripping me up 

"High value transactions in some applications require that the application is able to not only confirm that the transaction has been committed but that the transaction is only committed once or not at all. "

would this be still accurate to say? or am i misinterpreting? 

"CAMO allows your application to confirm that the transaction has been successfully committed and whether it was  only committed once or not at all. This can be especially valuable in applications that deal with high value transactions."

Reviewer 2: Do we even need to go into the "once or not at all"? Would it be easier to grasp if we state: "successfully committed exactly once, and only once even after retries due to failover"?

("successfully committed" kinda contradicts "committed not at all")

Author: ```suggestion
High value transactions in some applications require that the application successfully commited exactly once, and in the event of failover and retrying, only one. To ensure this happens in PGD, CAMO can be enabled allowing the application to actively participate in the transaction. 
```

#### Consensus

How [Raft](#raft) makes group-wide decisions. Given a number of nodes in a group, Raft looks for a consensus of the number of nodes/2+1 voting for a decision. For example, when a write leader is being selected, a Raft consensus is sought over which node in the group will be the write leader. Consensus can only be reached if there is a quorum of voting members.

#### Cluster

Generically, a cluster is a group of multiple redundant systems arranged to appear to end users as one system. See also [PGD clusters](#pgd-clusters), [Kubernetes clusters](#kubernetes-clusters) and [Postgres clusters](#postgres-cluster).

#### DDL

Data Definition Language - The subset of SQL commands that deal with the defining and managing the structure of a database. DDL statements can create, modify and delete objects - schemas, tables and indexes - within the database. Common DDL commands are CREATE, ALTER and DROP.

#### DML

> Data Manipulation Language - The subset of SQL commands that deal with manipulating the data held within a database. DML statements can create, modify and delete rows within tables in the database. Common DML commands are INSERT, UPDATE and DELETE. SELECT is also often referred to as DML, although it is actually part of the 

Author: Yes, that last sentence should have been deleted. The rabbit hole of DML/DQL awaited.

```suggestion
Data Manipulation Language - The subset of SQL commands that deal with manipulating the data held within a database. DML statements can create, modify and delete rows within tables in the database. Common DML commands are INSERT, UPDATE and DELETE. 
```

#### Eager

> Eager is a synchronous commit mode which avoids conflicts by detecting incoming potentially conflicting transactions and “eagerly” one of aborting them to maintain consistency. 

Reviewer 3: @djw-m should we define how a commit mode and commit scope are different? I imagine something very simple i.e. commit mode is a setting on a commit scope, see eager etc.?

Author: No, because commit scopes are rules and things like eager are modes applied to the things that are applied to various parts of the transactions in scope.

Reviewer 2: As part of the Postgres-R project, I had lengthy discussions with people claiming it clearly was eager and async. "Eager is a synchronous commit mode" used to be my original stance, from which I (personally) have diverged since.

However, for all PGD purposes, it is okay to state that.

Author: I think the query is more down to the fact that we refer to commit scopes as both the rules and the mechanisms enabled within the commit scopes (GC, LC, Eager etc)....

Going forward, I want to refer to commit scopes only as the rules in PGD that scope and set the commit modes which control how commits take place.

Commit kind and commit scope kind I've seen in other docs, but the former feels overly singular and the latter just feels like it's doubling down on the confusing use of commit scope.

Reviewer 2: WFM

#### Eventual consistency

A distributed computing consistency model stating changes to the same item in different cluster members will eventually converge to the same value. Asynchronous logical replication with conflict resolution and conflict-free replicated data types exhibit eventual consistency in PGD.

#### Failover

The automated process that recognizes a failure in a highly available database cluster and takes action to maintain consistency and availability. The goal is to minimize downtime and data loss.

#### Group commit

A synchronous commit mode which requires more than one PGD node to successfully receive and confirm a transaction at commit time.

#### Immediate consistency

A distributed computing model where all replicas are updated synchronously and simultaneously. This ensures that all reads after a write has completed will see the same value on all nodes. The downside of this approach is its negative impact on performance.

#### Kubernetes clusters

> A Kubernetes cluster is a group of machines that work together to run containerized applications. A [PGD Cluster](pgd-cluster) can be configured to run as containerized components on a Kubernetes Cluster.

Reviewer 3: @nataliawojcik27 note to self - check

#### Logical replication

> A more efficient method of replicating changes in the database. Rather than duplicate the originating database’s disk blocks, logical replication instead sees the DML commands - inserts, deletes and updates,- published to all systems that have subscribed to see the changes. Each subscriber then applies the changes locally. Logical replication is not able to support most DDL

Reviewer 3: @djw-m "Rather than duplicate the originating database’s disk blocks like in physical streaming replication, ..."

Author: ```suggestion
A more efficient method of replicating changes in the database. While physical streaming replication duplicate the originating database’s disk blocks, logical replication instead sees the DML commands - inserts, deletes and updates,- published to all systems that have subscribed to see the changes. Each subscriber then applies the changes locally. Logical replication is not able to support most DDL
```

#### Node

A general term for an element of a distributed system. A node can play host to any service. In PGD, there are [PGD Nodes](#pgd-node) which run a Postgres database and the BDR extension and optionally a PGD Proxy service.

> Typically, for high availability, each node runs on separate physical hardware, but not necessarily. For example, in modern cloud platforms such as Kubermetes the hardware may be shared with the cloud.

Reviewer 3: @nataliawojcik27 note to self - check

#### Node groups

PGD Nodes in PGD clusters can be organized into groups to reflect the logical operation of the cluster. For example, the data nodes in a particular physical location may be part of a dedicated node group for the location.

#### PGD cluster

A group of multiple redundant database systems and proxies arranged to avoid single points of failure while appearing to end users as one system. PGD clusters may be run on Docker instances, [Kubernetes clusters](kubernetes-clusters), cloud instances or “bare” Linux hosts, or a combination of those platforms. A PGD cluster may also include backup and proxy nodes. The data nodes in a cluster are grouped together in a top level group and into various local [node groups](#node-groups). 

### PGD node

> In a PGD cluster, there are nodes which run databases and participate in the PG Cluster. A typical PGD node will run a Postgres database and the BDR extension and optionally a PGD Proxy service. PGD Nodes may also be referred to as data nodes which suggests they store data, though some PGD Nodes, specifically [witness nodes](#witness-nodes) do not do that.

Reviewer 3: @djw-m "PG Cluster" -> "PGD Cluster"?

Author: ```suggestion
In a PGD cluster, there are nodes which run databases and participate in the PGD Cluster. A typical PGD node will run a Postgres database and the BDR extension and optionally a PGD Proxy service. PGD Nodes may also be referred to as data nodes which suggests they store data, though some PGD Nodes, specifically [witness nodes](#witness-nodes) do not do that.
```

#### Physical replication

> By making an exact copy of database disk blocks as they are modified to one or more standby cluster members, physical replication provides an easily implemented method to replicate servers. But there are restrictions on how it can be used. For example, only one master node can run write transactions. Also, the method requires that all cluster members are on the same major version of the database software, in addition to several other more complex restrictions.

Reviewer 3: @djw-m can we link back to a docs page that tells users how they can use PSR with EDB?

Author: This is Terminology, not an Index. And it would be the only outbound link on the page.

#### Recovery point objective (RPO)
#### Quorum

The maximum targeted period in which data might be lost due to a disruption in delivery of an application. A very low or minimal RPO is a driver for very high availability.
When a [Raft](#Raft) [consensus](#consensus) is needed by a PGD cluster, there needs to be  a minimum number of voting nodes participating in the vote. This number is called a quorum. For example, with a 5 node cluster, the quorum would be 3 nodes in the cluster voting. A consensus would be 5/2+1 nodes, 3 nodes voting the same way. If there were only 2 voting nodes, then a consensus would never be established.

#### Recovery time objective (RTO)
#### Raft

The targeted length of time for restoring the disrupted application.  A very low or minimal RTO is a driver for very high availability.
Replicated, Available, Fault Tolerance. A consensus algorithm which uses votes from a quorum of machines in a distributed cluster to establish a consensus. PGD uses RAFT within groups (top level or local) to establish which node is the write leader. 

#### Single point of failure (SPOF)
#### Read scalability

> The identification of a component in a deployed architecture that has no redundancy and therefore prevents you from achieving higher levels of availability.

Reviewer 3: @djw-m should we say 'introduce one or more read replica nodes, also known as subscriber only nodes in PGD, to a cluster..." to link the 2 terms?

Author: Not sure the terms are quite interchangable as it could be possible to implement read replicas in other ways.

A traditional computing approach of increasing a resource (CPU, memory, storage, network) to support a given workload until the physical limits of that architecture are reached, e.g., Oracle Exadata.

#### Witness nodes

Witness nodes primarily serve to help the cluster establish a consensus. An odd number of data nodes are needed to establish a consensus and, where resources are limited, a witness node can be used to participate in cluster decisions but not replicate the data. Not holding the data means it cannot operate as a standby server or provide majorities in synchronous commits.

#### Write leader

> In [always-on architectures](#always_on_architecture), a node is selected as the correct connection endpoint for applications This node is called the write leader and once selected  proxy nodes route queries and updates to it. With only one node receiving writes, unintended multi-node writes can be avoided. The write leader is selected by consensus of a quorum of data nodes. If the write leader becomes unavailable, the data nodes select another node to become write leader. Nodes that aren't the write leader are referred to as *shadow nodes*.

Reviewer 2: Upper-case "Always-On Arch"?

And a dot is missing after the first sentence.</nitpick>

> In an [Always-On Architecture](#always_on_architecture), a node is selected as the correct connection endpoint for applications. This node is called the write leader, and once selected, proxy nodes route queries and updates to it. With only one node receiving writes, unintended multi-node writes can be avoided. The write leader is selected by consensus of a quorum of data nodes. If the write leader becomes unavailable, the data nodes select another node to become write leader. Nodes that aren't the write leader are referred to as *shadow nodes*.

Reviewer: The definition of "Always-On Architecture" has been removed from the Terminology page. If this was intentional, the link should be removed.

> In an [Always-On Architecture](#always_on_architecture), a node is selected as the correct connection endpoint for applications. This node is called the write leader, and once selected, proxy nodes route queries and updates to it. With only one node receiving writes, unintended multi-node writes can be avoided. The write leader is selected by consensus of a quorum of data nodes. If the write leader becomes unavailable, the data nodes select another node to become write leader. Nodes that aren't the write leader are referred to as *shadow nodes*.

Author: ```suggestion
In an Always-On Architecture, a node is selected as the correct connection endpoint for applications. This node is called the write leader, and once selected, proxy nodes route queries and updates to it. With only one node receiving writes, unintended multi-node writes can be avoided. The write leader is selected by consensus of a quorum of data nodes. If the write leader becomes unavailable, the data nodes select another node to become write leader. Nodes that aren't the write leader are referred to as *shadow nodes*.
```

A traditional computing approach of increasing a resource (CPU, memory, storage, network) to support a given workload until the physical limits of that architecture are reached, e.g., Oracle Exadata.

#### Witness nodes

> To resolve clusters or groups of nodes coming to a consensus, there needs to be an odd number of data nodes. Where resources are limited, a witness node can be used to create an odd number of data nodes, participating in cluster decisions but not replicating the data. Not holding the data means it is not able to operate as a standby server.

Reviewer 3: @djw-m thinking rearranging might help? i.e. 

"Witness nodes primarily serve to help with consensus. Where resources are limited, a witness node can be used to create an odd number of data nodes, participating in cluster decisions but not replicating the data. Not holding the data means it is not able to operate as a standby server."

Author: ```suggestion
Witness nodes primarily serve to help the cluster establish a consensus. An odd number of data nodes are needed to establish a consensus and, where resources are limited, a witness node can be used to participate in cluster decisions but not replicate the data. Not holding the data means it cannot operate as a standby server or provide majorities in synchronous commits.
```

#### Write leader

> In an [Always-On Architectures](#always_on_architecture), a node is selected as the correct connection endpoint for applications. This node is called the write leader, and once selected, proxy nodes route queries and updates to it. With only one node receiving writes, unintended multi-node writes can be avoided. The write leader is selected by consensus of a quorum of data nodes. If the write leader becomes unavailable, the data nodes select another node to become write leader. Nodes that aren't the write leader are referred to as *shadow nodes*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In an [Always-On Architecture](#always_on_architecture), a node is selected as the correct connection endpoint for applications. This node is called the write leader, and once selected, proxy nodes route queries and updates to it. With only one node receiving writes, unintended multi-node writes can be avoided. The write leader is selected by consensus of a quorum of data nodes. If the write leader becomes unavailable, the data nodes select another node to become write leader. Nodes that aren't the write leader are referred to as *shadow nodes*.
```
